itable they subsidize other slower rail services.
SNCF had so much money they actually gave some to the French treasury earlier this year.4.
Premises on projected ridership are false.
The only high-speed rail system in the US is Amtrak's "Acela" service between NY-Washington and NY-Boston.
This system is well established and serves large population centers with excellent public transportation tie-ins to feed it such as subways, and they carry 3 million riders a year.
The French have the best high-speed rail system in the world, and their busiest line is Paris to Lyon, again large cities with major subway systems, and it carries perhaps 15 million riders a year.
In contrast, proponents of Prop 1A rely on a projection of 100 million riders per year between Los Angeles and San Francisco, a figure provided by a paid consultant that happened to be Lehman Brothers.
This projection of patronage is a fantasy.This paragraph is full of outright lies.
Yes, lies.First, Acela is not true HSR and is much slower than our system will be.
Anyone trying to compare the Acela to CA HSR either does not understand Acela or is deliberately misleading readers.
It does not speak very well of James Mills' vaunted "rail knowledge."Second, these arguments about ridership come directly from the oil company funded Reason Foundation.
It is a libertarian lies being passed off as fact.
Those ridership claims - specifically about Paris-Lyon - are complete nonsense.
We thoroughly debunked the "not enough riders" claim last month.
The key portion of our mythbusting:Cox-Vranich's [the Reason Foundation study] ridership figures are wildly inaccurate.
Using C-V's preferred measure, JR Central reported 2007 ridership of 80 million passenger km per Shinkansen route km (44.5 billion passenger km / 552 km route).
In the "high" scenario, CA HSRA is forecasting roughly 27 million passenger km per HSR route km (30 billion passenger km / 1,120 km route).
So C-V's claim that CA HSRA is using numbers higher than those achieved on any other system in the world is absurdly false - in fact, CA HSRA's numbers are only 1/3rd of what has been previously achieved.JR Central's Shinkansen is the densest ridership in the world.
A more informative comparison would be the TGV or the new Taiwan HSR (THSR).
We don't have passenger-km ridership for those lines, but we can compute passengers per route-km.
The TGV Paris Southeast (PSE) line gets 45k passengers per route-km (20 million pax / 448 route-km) while the THSR gets 101k passengers per route-km (34 million pax / 335 route-km).
CA HSR is forecasting a high of 80k passengers per route-km in 2030, or around 56k passengers per route-km at today's populations.
This is slightly above TGV PSE but well below THSR.
It does not seem unreasonable since the LA Metro Area is larger than Paris Metro Area or the Taipei Metro Area.
And more importantly, the SF Bay Area is twice as large as the Kaoshiung Metro Area and four times as large as the Lyon Metro Area.On to the fifth and final lie, which is the most ridiculous of them all:5.
Promises of future extension to Sacramento, Orange County and San Diego are empty in that no concrete plan of any kind is offered other than the unrealistic plan for a Los Angeles-San Francisco line.Mills is just showing off his ignorance here.
Prop 1A would fund a line from SF to Anaheim - which, last time I checked, was still in Orange County.
SD and Sacramento plans are in existence in full detail and can be found at the California High Speed Rail Authority website.It's worth closing by reminding people of the big picture here.
High speed rail will create badly needed green jobs and economic stimulus while providing Californians with sustainable transportation that reduces dependence on oil and cuts carbon emissions.
It is supported by virtually the entire California progressive community.It is being opposed by the Howard Jarvis Association and the Reason Foundation.
The former are the keepers of the right-wing flame here in California.
The latter are a group of rabid anti-government nuts who are funded by oil companies and other leading right-wing foundations.
They have been using an ignorant and pliant media to push out their "omg boondoggle not enough riders" nonsense over the last six weeks or so.
It would be a shame for folks in the blogosphere - folks who usually know better - than to repeat the high speed rail version of the "Obama is a Muslim" email.
Posted by Robert Cruickshank 12:01 AM comments carbon emissions, economy, editorials, environment, funding, peak oil, Prop 1A, Proposition 1A, public support, stimulus, sustainability, transportation Monday, October 27, 2008 Prop 1A Forum at UC Santa Cruz NOTE: We've moved!
Visit us at the California High Speed Rail Blog.
For those of you in the Monterey Bay or San Jos areas, I will be part of a panel discussion on Proposition 1A at UC Santa Cruz at noon today, in Cowell Conference Room 132.
Rod Diridon of the California High Speed Rail Authority will also be there.
RSVP here.Then at 2pm I will be a guest on Deborah Lindsay's show Tomorrow Matters, broadcast on KRXA 540 AM here in Monterey.
Deborah Lindsay focuses on sustainable communities, peak oil, and other environmental solutions to our ongoing ecological crisis.
You can listen live online if you don't live in the Monterey Bay area.UPDATE: Now that was fun.
The event at UCSC was a great success - thanks go in particular to Cynthia Burrage Armour and Dan Xie for helping to put it together.
I gave a good overview of HSR and the reasons why it is so vital to our future as Californians, and then Rod Diridon gave a really compelling and detailed explanation of HSR around the world and of our own system.
He was asked some very good questions by the audience and answered them quite effectively.
Diridon gave some key details on the financing of high speed rail that I had not known and that I hope to pass on to you all tomorrow or Wednesday once I can get them written down and confirmed.The discussion on Deborah Lindsay's show also went well.
We got some good calls from folks with questions, some critical, of the HSR project and I thought I did a good and thorough job of responding to them.
KRXA is a small operation and doesn't have complete audio archives, otherwise I'd offer you an MP3 here.
I was surprised that none of the usual HSR deniers called into the show!
Posted by Robert Cruickshank comments activism, CALPIRG, passenger rail, peak oil, Prop 1A, Proposition 1A, public support, transportation Sunday, October 26, 2008 Sustainability NOTE: We've moved!
Visit us at the California High Speed Rail Blog.
Earlier this summer the price of a barrel of crude oil hit a record $147.
Since then the price has declined dramatically to about $64.
Gas prices here in Monterey have fallen from a high of about $4.60 to just under $3.
Some might be tempted to argue this makes alternatives to oil less necessary, but that would miss the point - the current decline in oil prices is strictly a product of demand destruction.
What that means is we're in between a rock and a hard place.
Our economy has been built on growth made possible by cheap oil.
More cars need to be sold, more suburban sprawl needs to be built, more goods need to be hauled by truck in order for the 20th century economic model to continue.
If you can't do any of that without risking a crippling oil price increase like that which burst the housing bubble, you are stuck in an economic trough that has no visible way out.Unless, of course, you start building an alternative to oil.Besides, the phenomenon of peak oil is going to rather quickly necessitate such alternatives, if OPEC doesn't do so first.
If this current respite in oil prices is to be anything other than the eye of a hurricane, we must build our way out of oil dependence.Just as the oil crisis has not gone away, neither has the climate crisis.
Arctic sea ice nearly reached a new record minimum.
Global warming continues unabated, as the carbon-burning industry merely takes a short breather.2008 is therefore an opportunity to start transitioning away from a failed economic model, one that became so dependent on burning fossil fuels that the economy nearly collapsed and severe ecological crisis has taken place.
If we are to turn the 21st century into a sustainable century - with sustainable prosperity, built on renewable resources and a better, more sensible ecology, we need to start NOW on producing alternatives to oil.California High Speed Rail is one of those alternatives.
It will:-Reduce carbon dioxide emissions equivalent to removing 1.4 million cars from the road, and take the place of nearly 42 million annual city-to-city car trips (Final EIR) -Reduce CO2 emissions by up to 17.6 billion pounds/year (HSR fact sheet)-Reduce Californias oil consumption by up to 12 million barrels/year (same as above)According to the Final EIR 63% of intercity trips over 150 miles in California are taken by car (scroll to page 12).
This is a major factor in causing most of California to be out of compliance with state clean air goals.
Given that HSR would be much faster than driving between California's major metro regions, and will likely be less costly as well by 2018, HSR would make a significant dent in those car trips and therefore in the pollution they spew.And HSR provides a VAST carbon emissions savings over other forms of transportation:(Image from Alberta High Speed Rail)HSR can be powered entirely by renewable energy sources, a goal the California High Speed Rail Authority recently adopted.
HSR will provide a guaranteed buyer for renewable energy projects, making their construction more likely and more economical.Sustainability is also a smart economic strategy.
We have talked repeatedly about the economic stimulus it will provide.
It will also provide a Green Dividend to Californians in the amount of several billion dollars at least.Sustainable transportation is both economical and necessary for California's 21st century future.
Sure, we have a temporary respite from the worst of the oil price hikes.
But does anyone here really want to gamble that such price increases will never return?
That we can continue the 20th century sprawl model indefinitely?If you don't want to make that sucker bet, then vote Yes on Prop 1A.
Posted by Robert Cruickshank comments carbon emissions, climate, economy, environment, gas prices, peak oil, pollution, Prop 1A, Proposition 1A, stimulus, sustainability, transportation Saturday, October 25, 2008 Investment NOTE: We've moved!
Visit us at the California High Speed Rail Blog.
We talk so much about the stock market these days - its ups, its downs, and its crashes - that we seem to forget what it's ostensibly all about - an investment.
You put some money in now and you get MORE in return later.
Of course there is a cost to this - that money up front.
Sure, you could use it to buy something else right now, but if you commit that money to the investment - especially if it's a good investment, in something certain to bring you greater savings and new opportunities in the future - it seems like a no brainer of a move.That's the nutshell version of the argument advanced by R.
Sean Randolph in today's San Jose Mercury News.
Randolph is president and CEO of the Bay Area Council Economic Institute, a consortium of leading businesses and institutions in the Bay Area.
Randolph understands what we have been saying for months here at the blog - that high speed rail and Prop 1A are a smart and necessary investment for our state's future:The project will generate nearly 50,000 long-term jobs in the Bay Area between now and 2030.
Between $6.9 billion and $8.9 billion will be spent here on construction, generating 128,000 to 130,000 direct and indirect jobs during construction.
By taking cars off the roads the system will enhance business productivity.
Bay Area commuters lose 150,000 hours each day to congestion, at an annual cost to the economy of $2.6 billion.
In-state business can also be conducted more efficiently, as travel time from San Jose to Los Angeles will be cut to a little over two hours.That's the first effort I've seen to quantify a California version of the green dividend that has been studied in Portland - and the $2.6 billion figure here is limited to congestion (not including savings on gas) and limited to the Bay Area.
We can assume that figure will be larger for the entire state and once savings on gas is included - for flights and cars - we may very well approach, yes, $10 billion.
The job creation alone is both considerable and desperately needed in a state whose unemployment rate is at 7.7% and rising fast.
Do we want to wait until we're pushing 10%?
Those construction jobs create other indirect jobs, and they ALL create tax income for a state that desperately needs it.All while acting as a long-term investment that will provide clean, safe, sustainable and quality transportation that fights global warming instead of contributes to it.
High speed rail is an investment we can afford - and an investment we cannot afford to reject.
Especially when you consider that not only do we not have to pay $10 billion up front, but that it will bring in even more money from the federal government, stimulus money we aren't going to get if we reject Prop 1A.The HSR deniers don't see the purpose of investment.
They instead see HSR as a threat either to their property values or political ideologies.
Which is their right, of course - but Californians should think about the value of the investment, and not be swayed by those who prefer to cling to the past instead of make a smart investment to secure our future.
Posted by Robert Cruickshank comments economy, Prop 1A, Proposition 1A, stimulus, sustainability, transportation Friday, October 24, 2008 Their Past vs Our Future NOTE: We've moved!
Visit us at the California High Speed Rail Blog.
With just over a week until the votes are counted we are about to learn whether California will embrace the 21st century or go down with the sinking 20th century ship.Proposition 1A and high speed rail are a cornerstone of California's efforts to build prosperity for the 21st century.
The infrastructure that built 20th century prosperity - including those paid for with bonds approved by voters in the depth of the Depression - has taken us as far as it can.
California's 20th century prosperity was based on cheap oil, which is beginning to run out.
And yes, it is still running out.
Neither the summer price spike nor the current price collapse change the underlying facts - we are reaching peak oil which means long-term supply shortages and price increases.
The current decline in prices is due to demand destruction, which means that if people take advantage of lower prices by driving more...the price will again rise.
And of course OPEC isn't going to take this lying down - the last time gas prices dropped dramatically, in 1999, was merely prelude to a steady, 8-year, 1300% increase in the price of oil.Well before gas prices hit $4 this summer they had destroyed the American economy.
The housing bubble burst in 2006 - at precisely the moment gas prices hit $3.
And which areas have seen the steepest home value declines and the highest foreclosure rates?
The car-dependent suburbs.
Which areas have held their values and had the lowest foreclosure rates?
City centers and neighborhoods with mass transit options.This was clearly illustrated by a recent episode of NOW on PBS, Driven to Despair.
The episode contrasted two young couples - one living in Hemet (east of Riverside) and one living in South Pasadena near the Gold Line.
The family living in Hemet was facing serious financial distress and a lower standard of living owing to their dependence on oil.
The family living in South Pasadena had more disposable income and a happier life because they were free from that dependence.On a macro level we have already demonstrated the green dividend that results from building mass transit - a multibillion dollar economic shot in the arm.
In the case of high speed rail this will be compounded by the significant economic stimulus of HSR - just as the Golden Gate Bridge and Shasta Dam were in the Depression.
160,000 construction jobs is nothing to sneeze at.We also need to remember the environmental benefits of high speed rail.
It seems global warming and carbon emissions have faded a bit from the public's consciousness which is a shame - pollution and carbon emissions cost money and the longer we delay in reducing them and building a sustainable alternative, the more expensive life will ultimately become here in California.To ignore all of this and embrace the status quo is to look at a broken economy and shrug and hope we somehow magically recover, and that somehow the conditions that caused the economic downturn will magically disappear.
They won't.
If California wants to enjoy the kind of widely shared prosperity in the 21st century that we had in the 20th we need to reorient this state away from oil and sprawl and toward urban density and sustainable transportation.
HSR will stimulate both.It's no accident that those lined up to oppose Prop 1A are from that shrinking group that still benefits from the 20th century status quo.
The right-wingers at the San Diego Union-Tribune don't want to see their anti-government, anti-transit dreams get shot down by voters.
Dan Walters is one of the state's leading defenders of sprawl and small government, so it makes sense that he'd oppose Prop 1A as well.Then there is the Reason Foundation, which is swimming in oil money.
They have every reason to want to kill HSR, which would undermine their anti-government, pro-oil, pro-sprawl agenda.
Sure, their arguments are riddled with factual errors and their flagship study lacks credibility.
But it's all well and good in the service of defending the status quo, which has failed for America but succeeded for their oil company buddies.It would seem to me that when a project's opponents are the far right and the oil companies, you're doing something right, you've got a winning idea.But that's not why HSR and Prop 1A are a good idea.
They are the gateway to a more secure, more prosperous California in the 21st century.
I do not see why we would listen to those who helped create the current economic failure when they pontificate against Prop 1A.
Posted by Robert Cruickshank comments carbon emissions, climate, economy, environment, November election, peak oil, Prop 1A, Proposition 1A, stimulus, sustainability, transportation, urban density Thursday, October 23, 2008 Kopp's Epic Smackdown of HSR Critics NOTE: We've moved!
Visit us at the California High Speed Rail Blog.
On August 26th AB 3034, after a weeks-long delay, was finally signed by Arnold Schwarzenegger.
That bill directed the California High Speed Rail Authority to create a new business plan...by September 1.
Giving the Authority merely five days to come up with the new plan.Why the delay?
The bill was passed out of the Assembly on May 29.
From there it languished in the State Senate.
Alan Lowenthal put out a nonsense study trying to cast doubt on the plan, but it was Sen.
Roy Ashburn who played the central role in delaying AB 3034 into early August.
By the time the Senate passed AB 3034, however, Arnold Schwarzenegger had started in on his temper tantrum, refusing to sign any new bills until we got a new budget.
Arnold relented on AB 3034 - but had the bill bent sent to Arnold sooner, it would not have been subject to Arnold's tantrum, and there would have been time to produce it.But it gets worse.
As you know, the state budget delay this year was the worst on record - three months long.
The state Constitution mandates that a budget be approved by June 15 and implemented on July 1 - the beginning of the new fiscal year.The Authority's staff consists of 6.5 employees.
Not a huge amount of staff to put together a business plan, actuall
